Recording is paused.
Rachel, you're, you're, you're safe. I was
Wondering if he was hiding around the corner making
Public session and back
to our submissions on the Fast Track
approvals Amendment Bill.
And we welcome the Parliamentary Commissioner
for the environment, Simon, to the committee this morning.
Uh, this afternoon, actually this afternoon.
Uh, and you've got 20 minutes with us.
Uh, take your submission as read, uh,
and we'll open up to you for your opening remarks.
Well, thank you Madam Chair, and,
and I, I do hope you have had time to read it,
and I appreciate that you haven't had a lot of time.
Yes, it is, um, better crafted than what I'm going to say
to you, but it would take much longer if I tried to read it.
And I want to leave you time for questions. Obviously.
Look, I've got nothing to offer the committee on the
provisions that relate to supermarkets
or some of the minor technical amendments
that have received broad support.
My comments are confined to the radical proposals that seek
to re-engineer the fast track process in midstream.
As you'll be aware, I hope from my written submission,
I consider that the existing fast track process is working
well, better frankly, than I expected.
That's due to two things principally.
Firstly, the wise decision to leave critical judgements
and determinations to independent properly qualified panels,
empowered to inform themselves about the key
dimensions of what's proposed.
And secondly, the very professional way in which the EPA
and the panel conveners have gone about establishing a
process that is both, uh, transparent and swift
and gives individual cases the best chance
of being properly dealt with.
This bill torpedoes these two positive elements
below the waterline in the short time available.
I won't dwell on the practical process problems the bill
raises, although my submission refers to them,
they're expertly canvassed by the panel conveners
who I think are following me.
These are people of real substance and experience,
and if they tell you something as amiss,
I suggest you listen
because restricting timeframes could actually backfire
and undermine the whole process.
I want instead to use the very limited time available to me
to focus on the two most egregious, substantive provisions,
and they, in my view, are clause five, dealing
with government policy statements
and Clause 33, dealing with input by affected persons.
Now, the proposal in clause five
that ministers should be able
to concoct bespoke government policy statements,
which panels must consider, is a thinly veiled attempt
to guarantee a favorable decision.
The government is asking parliament,
government's asking you Parliament
to give it an open-ended power to determine
what national regional benefit will mean
for any particular type of infrastructure or development.
And in the absence of any transitional provisions,
these policy statements can be applied to applications
that are already in train.
They've already got panels hearing them.
This is executive overreach for which no case has been made.
It is as open-ended
as the infamous Economic Stabilization Act
that allowed governments to regulate
absolutely anything if they thought it
threatened economic stability.
I've really taken aback
that the government should be asking parliament to license
ministers to issue what the New Zealand initiative
charitably, I think describes
as opaque ministerial directions.
There are no guardrails if you enact this
provision, no guardrails.
Ministers will be able to design bespoke policy statements
for particular types of projects in an attempt
to provide certainty for specific applications.
The vague drafting of Clause five means
that ministers could, for example, instruct panelists that
as a matter of government policy mining is
of significant regional benefit when proposed in the Corra
Mandel or on Great Barrier Island.
And that in weighing the benefits of any project,
quantifiable economic benefits must be given greater weight
than less easily quantified intangible environmental cost
or risk, which will pass to future generations.
There is nothing to prevent something as directive as that.
That's the key point about the legislation
that's been put in front of you.
The amendments appear intended to whittle away the autonomy
of panel conveners
and expert panels by making the decision making boundaries
as narrow as possible in an attempt to orbit guarantee
approval for projects that ministers deemed
to be good for us.
Which begs the question, why have a panel at all
if you can even find members to appoint?
And I think it will be hard to get panel members
to serve if you pass this into law.
And also it creates a very strong incentive
to lobby ministers for special favors with all the risks
that entails mm-hmm.
Definitions which contribute to the decision making criteria
that a panel must consider should be prescribed
by you, by parliament.
And some submitters have offered views on
how this could be achieved if the committee thinks
that definition is necessary.
While I'm on the topic of ministerial powers,
you'll note in my submission a discussion of new powers
to direct the EPA on the performance of its functions
and duties and the exercise of its powers.
I encourage the committee to query this with officials
and in particular, satisfy yourself that Clause 48
can't be used as a mechanism
for directing panels and conveners.
Now let me turn to clause 33, which replaces the ability
of the panel to invite comments from
any other person the panel considers appropriate
with a limitation that the panel can only invite comments
from other persons if the relevant local authorities
or agencies do not intend to comment on the matter
or if the comments they intend
to make will not sufficiently address the
matter how I won.
Are panels supposed
to know whether local authorities are going to
sufficiently address a matter?
More importantly, since when
have local authorities become the only legitimate
mouthpieces for public concern as a rate payer,
I don't think they're,
it will certainly place enormous pressure on local
authorities as the only voice for community
and wider public concerns.
Now I have, uh, with me here today,
team members Shannon Watson, who I recruited specifically
because of his practical experience and consenting matters.
He's actually been involved in some fast track stuff.
If you've got questions about
what impact the additional pressures imposed
by this bill might have on overstretched local authorities,
he may be able to help you.
The bill seeks to significantly reduce the ability
of people whose property
and lives could be placed at risk
to even express their views to panels.
Some of you who are on the committee
that heard submissions on the original bill,
which is now law, may recall that I mentioned the air case.
You may recall that the air case
and the oral submission I made to you air was an application
for a very large
above ground water storage dam in North Canterbury.
Uh, issues in the early stage of the hearing were
of a highly technical engineering nature,
but they suddenly became real
because during a a a break in the hearings,
the kaikoura earthquake happened.
Now it emerged that in the event of a dam breach,
about 200 homes were located in
what would be the flow path
of fast moving flood waters stretching for some kilometers
below the site and located along small unsealed rural roads.
Now, I expressed concern about those people, uh,
having the ability to, uh, actually put something
to a panel before.
But these are the sort
of people a panel would under this bill no longer be able
to seek comment from panel, could not seek
comment from those people.
Now, I think committee members should ask themselves
if they would want to live below a tailings dam
or a reservoir which could fail,
but have no ability to contribute their views
to a process in which the government has
decreed that there are benefits.
And where a decision is being made under punishing
time constraints.
It seems to me that something like a tailings dam will
inevitably impact on property values downstream
of that structure.
If that's the case, then the decision
to fast track a mining consent favors one person's property
rights at the expense of another without giving
the latter any chance to have their say.
Finally, there has been no serious
regulatory analysis of this bill,
and I strongly suggest
that the committee seeks detailed information from officials
in the Ministry for Regulation
or the Minister to explain the absence of a policy rationale
or regulatory impact analysis.
That's enough from me.
I think we have a little time for questions. Thank
You. Uh, thank
you commissioner for that very expressive,
passionate contribution there.
I will go first to Rachel Brooking,
who has a question. And then Celia,
Thank you. And thank you for
focusing on those two things, uh,
being clause five and clause 33,
and I want to discuss both of them with you
and, uh, question whether clause five with, uh,
this reference to government
or the government policy statements
that you're talking about that I think
you were quoting from some, uh, the New Zealand Institute
saying that they were an opaque ministerial decision
Direction. Direction.
So, um,
if you've got comments on if there's a way to fix that,
I'm interested in terms of definitions of what a, what they,
what the criteria could be for them
and what the constraints would be.
Um, I'm also though more interested in the focus on things,
uh, getting into the fast track process
and that what this is what seems the, um,
government policy statements are about
and an opportunity to come into the process.
And you're shaking your head. So I'm interested in the,
the consequences of being able to come into a process
when we already had 149 projects come into the process
via the schedule and the committee stage
of the fast track approvals bill.
And some of those projects are very controversial,
have been turned down before.
How can this be any worse? Is my first question around that.
That's my framing. But how
Can this, what is this, this
Work, oh, this change to enable more things through,
through a nebulous government policy statement.
We dunno what it could be about.
How can that, how can that be worse?
One question, and then is it limited to the access
to the process rather than the decision making,
which is your second point?
And your second point seems to be con um,
about the constraints that decision makers will have
and how that will lead to worse decisions.
Well look on, on, uh, I hand to my general counsel
for the legal point to reply to a lawyer,
but, uh, the reason I was shaking my head is it's not
limited to entry into the process.
It, it is comp, there are no guardrails.
You could write a bespoke policy for anything
and that, so as legislators, I'm saying to you,
do you really want a provision which gives ministers
the power to write anything they like?
Now I'll, I'll, I'll let,
I'll let my colleague here reply in a more
focused legal way.
Yeah, I'll deal with the criteria that you could put
around GPS, um, other submitters have commented on.
But just to, to follow on from what you've been saying,
Simon, with regards to entry
to the process versus decision making considerations,
the g the government policy statements would have an impact
on entry to the process, to the effect that, uh,
the minister's decision to refer would need to consider
the minister's statements
that they've issued under that clause.
So it would potentially, uh,
be more permissive in that respect.
Uh, but I would just temper that in terms
of answering the member's question just to reorientate that,
um, the listed projects, whilst they have particular access,
uh, to the fast track process,
it doesn't fast track their substantive application.
No. So they must still make a substantive application.
So it doesn't mean they're in the process,
they've just leapfrogged over the referral process.
Um, in relation to how you could put criteria
around government policy statements
to give them some more rigor, uh,
Simon has mentioned in his submission, um, uh, the, on
what basis those are being made.
So whether or not you'd want to include criteria around
how you generate a government policy statement, for example,
will it be informed by a cost benefit analysis
or is it simply a pluck?
Um, you'll see that the RMLA has
provided a table of, uh, potential solutions to some
of the issues that have been raised by many submitters, um,
appreciating that that has all been done at extreme haste.
So they're not, uh, perfect solutions,
but they certainly provide some, uh, suggestions.
If you look at the national policy statements under the RMA
as a potential template, uh, to draw criteria from,
so a bit more transparency around what is proposed,
would you consult on them?
How long would that consultation period be?
Um, would you put any parameters around
what could or could not be?
For example, may a government policy statement
names specific applications.
So there's a real lack of prescription around what types
of infrastructure
and development is being referred to in clause five.
But, but just to cap that off, can I say,
I don't think you need these government policy
statements, period.
Uh, I wouldn't be spending too much time trying to craft,
uh, careful criteria.
There's no evidence that they are needed.
You have a system that is working good,
people are asking the right questions in quite
constrained timeframes.
Uh, and I think it could be a lot worse.
Uh, is the short answer to your question, just
Can I ask a s on that?
Yeah. Just because you did talk about putting some criteria
around the government policy statements.
Would that in your view, uh,
commissioner provide the guardrails
that you are talking about?
It might, depends what's in them,
but currently there's absolutely nothing.
And as I've said to you, I don't believe you need these
government policy statements.
I mean, this is just, we're back down the track
of the expansion of the ministerial and executive power.
You know, you sign off a law
and say, we'll leave that to the minister,
and they can make it up as they like, I mean, you, you,
of course you can constrain anything,
but we haven't been given any analysis which says there's a
problem Panels needed, government policy statements.
I don't think they did. You mean ask ask the panel
convenience what they think about that.
But I don't think that that's, that the case
for doing anything has not been made
And they're coming in next.
So is your question on clause five and that same,
because, um, Pam, that's why question's been asked by Okay.
It has. Okay, there we go. Carry on. So
The, the well, and it was related to then the constraints
of the decision makers once,
once the decision makers get it.
Um, and just to check that you are saying, um, that this,
this means that things can get a lot worse when the,
when the panel conveners can't ask the people down the road
in your ear example, that will make decision making worse.
Yeah, absolutely. As I say, how,
how are you supposed to know?
If you say, oh, no, no, the school
will be handled by the local authority.
How are you supposed to know the local authority will handle
a matter satisfactorily?
Do you wanna add some? Sure.
I think I would refrain from describing it
as making decision making worse.
The expert panels do the best they can
with the information that's before them.
What it may risk is robust decision making
as the outcome from the fast track process.
Mm-hmm. So when we talk about robust, it's evidence based,
it's information based,
and ultimately from a legal perspective, it's defensible.
Yeah. And if you haven't got robust decision making
as an outcome of this process,
then judicial review will be the only avenue.
Mm-hmm. And we'll then to use Simon's words,
torpedo the process in an entirely different way.
Thank you. Look, we'll go to Celia now.
Thank you. Um, I've got some questions from your
submission and I do admire the, um, language you use.
You're not being mincing words there.
Um, somebody described this bill
as a Trojan supermarket
and that it is disguised with a,
something we're all keen on,
which is reducing grocery prices,
but it actually goes far wider
and invades as the Trojan horse did,
invades the fast track bill with other issues.
Well, look, governments have legislative vehicles.
They want to poke things into them. I've got no objection.
If they want to do something on
supermarkets, I've got no objection.
If they wanna do something of a technical
nature, I do have an objection.
If they're putting very, very significant
substantive changes into a bill
without making the case.
I mean, you do not have policy analysis
or regulatory impact analysis to support it.
Um, so I think that's how I would respond.
And handing following on from that, with the ministerial
role of the government policy statement, as I understand it,
and we've been a minister
and I have not, so you might be able to enlighten me
So long ago, what it's like
A minister can take needs to take
their policy statement to other relevant
portfolios, but they don't need
to get the agreement from the other portfolio.
So it might be something that was going
to be hugely damaging to, let's say conservation take it
to the Minister of Conservation
and just having taken it
to them rather than getting their
agreement would be sufficient.
Is that your understanding?
Well, I can, I can get my lawyer to answer that,
but look, the practical reality is
ministers will operate their affairs
behind their closed doors.
They'll reach agreements.
I mean, if, you know that that's, that's the reality.
I don't think there's much to be
to found there, but, but they're not,
But they're not, sorry, I was trying to, to be clearer.
The minister does not have
to get agreement from the other portfolio.
They just have to tell 'em about it.
Yeah, but I mean, how would you ever know?
I, I'll, I'll let a lawyer answer
this in a more scholarly way.
I practical terms, I can tell you if a minister, uh,
has a policy they've consulted
and then they go ahead with it one way
or another, the government's agreed that that's okay.
But would you like to comment on the legal drafting?
Look, I think you'll find across the statute books,
it's littered with references where a minister must consult
with other relevant portfolio ministers.
It's in the Fast Track act at the moment. Yeah.
Um, and I think that's all you can reasonably expect in
terms of drafting for this given cabinet collective
responsibility for that are taken in the first place.
Exactly. But what's really missing,
and to use conservation as an example, is anybody
who enjoys the conservation values of
that land are being excluded from the process.
So a government policy statement is being generated without
any transparent inputs.
Consultation Yeah. Or decisions are
Being made. That's
the more significant point. Yeah.
So no specialist knowledge. No, thank you.
Look, we've got other members who want to ask questions
and we are running out of time, so we'll
go to ground for column now. Yeah.
Some question, it's interesting your comment
that obviously when the first Fast Track bill came through,
you made the comment that, you know, you,
you had doubts about it big time,
and you submitted, you know, your concerns, yet you're now,
you're now saying that currently it's working well, you,
it's working pretty well, you're reasonably happy
with the way it is working.
Um, what, why couldn't that then become the case
with Cliff's version?
Because, Because
this version has no guardrails, it's got no protections.
Stuff can just come from heaven, bing,
and apply even to stuff which is already in the process.
I mean, I think the, the, my view of Fast Track
as it now exists, it's not perfect
and it's putting a lot of pressure on
people and it's early days.
We can't yet say it's unmitigated success.
But for the reasons I gave, the people who have the EPA
and the panel conveners have sat down
and said, okay, within these timeframes,
how can we make this work?
It is, it is pretty transparent.
And panels are demonstrating
that they are actually interested in taking information from
people other than the narrow list.
Yeah. So to speak. Uh, what this, what this is trying
to do is to take away all of the sort of buffer
and flexibility that is in the existing legislation.
I don't think you can fix this.
The best thing is to drop this
and have some confidence in what you actually enacted.
Thank you very much. We will have to leave it there.
We have met time, and thank you
for your insights and, and thorough.
Sorry, I couldn't answer submission question. Thank you.
Anyone's welcome to come and talk to us.
By the way, if that we're just across the road, if you want
to go into some detail, I've got people who can help
You. You know, we appreciate
that. Thank very much.
Thank you. We here though at the moment,
So Yes.
Urgency. So, uh,
hence why we're moving through pretty quickly.
So we, uh, have next up the panel convener
for the fast Track approvals at 2024.
Welcome, welcome to the select committee this afternoon.
You have 20 minutes with us also.
So, uh, we'll hand over to you the opening remarks,
but take the submission as read
and members of course will have questions. So, over to you.
All right, thank you very much. Uh, my name is Jane Wick
and I am the panel convener
for the Fast Track Approvals Act.
And I'm here today presenting
with Jennifer Caldwell an associate panel convener.
Uh, we will not be addressing the policy
and the amendment bill,
but we wish to acknowledge, acknowledge the gravity
of the issues that this committee will be working through.
And I urge the committee to be alert for
unintended policy outcomes and to proceed with caution.
Here. I am pleased to take the, uh, Madam Chair's, uh,
guidance, uh, that the panel convener
submission has been read.
The submission deals with the practicality
of six amendments.
We're happy to take questions in relation
to those amendments, but we're also happy
to take questions in relation
to the implementation of the act.
The key message is this, it is early days,
but the act as currently framed is working well.
It's working as was intended.
The purpose of the Fast Track Approvals Act is
to facilitate the delivery of infrastructure
and development projects that provide significant regional
and national benefits.
The legislation responds to broad cross party recognition
of New Zealand's infrastructure deficit
and the need to support sustainable economic growth.
And the key features of your existing act are,
which facilitates infrastructure
and development, are
that the act is a one-stop shop for approvals.
Applications are not notified the timeframe
to release a decision set on a case by case basis.
By the panel convener.
Panels of experts are being appointed for their knowledge,
skills, and expertise.
There is no right of appeal to the environment court
and appeals to the high court are on matters of law.
Only the acts inquiry led approach
was new to New Zealand law,
and this has created the opportunity
for a credible alternative environmental practice to emerge
and to address some of the underlying drivers
of environmental, uh, law reform.
The work of the panel convenience has been on process
redesign on cutting through the outdated,
unhelpful modes of practice.
And this is essential to deliver on this acts purpose
and this ACT's promise.
So the markets of success
for this le legislation are as follows.
First, the extensive positive engagement
between key stakeholders, including local authorities,
ministering agencies, practitioners,
and the legal profession.
With the panel conveners, New Zealand is working hard
to deliver this act.
Second, the caliber of experts attracted
and appointed to the panels
and the robustness of their decisions.
This legislation is complex and it needs to be,
but there are risks created
by advancing impractical amendments that the panel
and those risks are addressed in the panel
co convenance submissions.
But the risks arise in seeking, uh, seeking speed
without corresponding change in environmental practice,
while at the same time leaving untouched
the acts robust decision making directions in practical
unworkable changes will simply concentrate
pressure on panels without delivering the much needed reform
of environmental practice.
And where this to happen, the quality
of some decisions will be very vulnerable
to judicial review and appeal.
I'm gonna hand over now to my colleague Jennifer. Thanks.
Thank you. Committee.
I just wanna start with a couple of statistics
that you might be interested in.
First is that we've appointed 23 panels to date
since the portal opened with the EPA in February.
That process has delivered five final decisions
to approve projects.
There's two draft decisions currently
out for comment at the moment.
There'll be another three decisions
provided by the end of the year, potentially a fourth
because one or two panels are running ahead of schedule.
So you can expect a good 10 approval decisions, uh,
on important projects,
but to be delivered by the end of the year,
that's in a period of less than 10 months,
depending on when those applications were lodged.
Now, um, our view is that
that is really a very promising start
to the implementation of this process.
Um, there were 149 projects listed in the second schedule.
We can only set up panels at a rate at which
applications are lodged.
We know that there are a number of applications
that will not be made
because proponents have decided not
to advance them at this time
or perhaps have decided
to advance them under the more traditional
process for various reasons.
Uh, but literally it's not
as if there are 120 projects waiting
for us to set up panels.
Uh, we set them up as in when the applications are lodged,
checked is complete and then provided to us.
Um, there are a couple of panels due to be set up next week.
Three, in fact, I think will be appointed next week.
Uh, so the process is working
and it's a little bit, I have
to say it was a little bit surprising to us
to see the tender of some of these amendments, uh,
which appear to be driven by, uh, some commentary, uh,
to the government that somehow the process is not working
as well as it should or not working as fast
as it should or could.
Uh, our view is it's working well, uh,
and that is despite some quite challenging, uh,
timeframes involved.
Uh, I should also say that as well as speaking for ourselves
and being available to you
to answer questions about the actual process
of setting up panels.
Uh, to some extent we are here on behalf of panels
because they don't have a voice in this process.
We're talking about, you know, a couple of hundred people
who have, you know, um, been willing to take appointment
to one of these panels, um, and to devote the time
and the discipline needed to work through this process
to deliver robust decisions.
Uh, they're not in front of you,
but we are also very mindful of the pressures
that are being brought to bear on them already
and which may intensify if some
of these amendments go through.
Uh, I know they've been described
as relatively minor technical
or mechanical changes, um,
to speed up processing time, for example.
But we do think, as Jane has said,
that there is a danger here that there could be unforeseen
or unintended consequences.
Our view is that the act works as a cohesive hole.
You might think of it like a spider web.
You pull on one strand that sets off vibrations
or ripples throughout the whole structure.
So what we've tried to focus our submission on is some
of those ripple effects that may not have been anticipated.
And those are very much in the realm
of workability of the process.
Um, I was responsible for setting up the panels to deal
with the Yhe North application
for the Taranaki VTM application
and also for the Port of Toga Stella Passage application.
If you have questions about the process
or the challenges that were involved in setting up those
panels and fixing those timeframes, I'm very happy
to answer those questions.
I would say, however, that those are three
of the most contentious projects
or complex projects that were in the second schedule,
that they were lodged very early on in the, um, in the,
in the implementation of the act.
And that they had a range of quite unique challenges
because all of them had been through some form
of earlier consenting process that either, uh,
was unsuccessful
or did not reach a conclusion which left a number
of unanswered issues and questions
and a number of parties whose engagement was cut short.
So, you know, I would invite anyone who's got concerns about
those applications in particular to be mindful
of the context in which those panels were set up.
I should add, however, that, apart from Stellar passage,
which has obviously been subject
to a separate judicial review process, you know, Taranaki
and why he are working their way through the process,
they are being led by retired senior court judges.
They've got very capable panels around them.
And there will in fact be a draft decision
released on the YE North expansion next week,
I believe next Wednesday or uh, Tuesday or Wednesday.
But as I said, I'm happy to answer any questions
that you have about that process just to understand some
of the challenges that we are already facing
and setting up some panels.
Um, you know, my principal concerns are
around those timeframes.
15 working days
to set up a panel on a contentious
application is not enough.
And I can tell you that for those three specific projects,
I would not have been able to set up the panel
and do everything I needed to do
and set the timeframe had I been constrained
to 15 working days.
I would also tell you
that those panels would not have been able to deliver
a robust decision in 60 working days.
Each of them was given longer than that, ranging I think
between 75 and a hundred additional working days.
And they will need all of that.
Obviously, our specific concerns are
detailed in our submission.
Uh, but just to reiterate our key message,
we think the process is working well
and it's delivering results that are fulfilling the purpose
of the act in a way that is consistent
with the procedural principles in Section 10 IE, timely,
efficient, consistent, and cost effective.
We have worked very hard to help achieve those results.
You've heard about the guidance that we've issued
to panels. Sorry,
Chair, sorry to interrupt you. We're gonna run
Out of time. Oh, I'm sorry.
I'm actually, I'm actually finished. Yeah,
If you, if you just round up No, no, that's we open,
that's open That, that, because we do have
quite a few questions.
No, that's fine. Questions. So we
you sure You don't want to make any mark?
No, no, I was really on the last point, so that's fine.
Okay. No, thank you. Thank you for that submission.
Um, Rachel Brooking has the first question.
Uh, thank, thank you. Thank you both.
Look, I was very worried that panels would be set up
and would be chaired for these complex projects by, um,
planners and is are great.
But you are, um, making the point well
that in fact you have been appointed as the, uh, judge Jane
as the, um, panel convener.
And both of you have worked very hard
to have those very robust panels and it's a robustness.
That is my question.
You were in the room and you heard, uh,
the parliamentary commissioner before and, um,
and his, uh, lawyer talk about, uh, the risk
of not enabling
or changing the discretion that those panels have as to
who they can, um, ask for evidence from.
So that's the, the clause, um, 50, the
Commentary clause, is it?
Yeah. Commentary clause. Who to invite for a comment?
Yes. That, that clause, so removing that relying,
um, very heavily on local government.
Rebecca's comment was that the at risk
for robust decision making that is defensible
and then that will lead to more judicial reviews.
Mm. Can you, um, tell me if you agree with that or not?
And then also maybe some examples of the types of, um,
comment that the panels have been seeking.
Don't need the details, just the ideas of the, um, the sorts
of evidence that the panels have been able to obtain
through the commentary that they would not have
otherwise had the opportunity
To obtain. Right.
And so I understand, um, the,
the question is directed to, um, section 53, 53 and, uh,
and at the moment, section 53, there are some people
that you must invite and that won't change.
You must invite the local authorities, the iwi authorities,
the administrator agencies, doesn't change,
must invite people who are also adjacent owners
and occupies doesn't change.
But then the panel has under the current act a discretion
to invite anybody else who they think appropriate
to invite about that matter.
We have put a lot of guidance in our guidance notice to how,
how to approach the exercise of that
because this is not your RMA business as usual, you know,
effect, you know, invite people
who are affected in some way.
It's not that it's something else.
And the guidance note, seek
to articulate what that might be.
The, the law would change in as much as, uh,
the pa the panel would, uh, need to invite, comment, um, or,
or to solicit comment from the local authority as
to the matters which the local authority are going
to be commenting on themselves.
And then on that basis reach of you, is that sufficient in
and of itself, or do we need to go further?
Or if the local authority's not actually inviting
that comment, then maybe we definitely need to go further.
And the difficulty with that for a panel, um,
and we are here, we are only talking about the first 10
working days now, uh, of the panel's existence, is
that the panel is getting to grips, uh, with the application
the local authorities are getting
to grips with the application.
Uh, because not all applicants are revealing the
applications to the local authorities
before, uh, filing them with the EPA,
the local authorities may not have, um, come to any view as
to the matters which they would likely be making comment on,
and therefore might not be in a position to respond.
Uh, when asked by the panel,
what are the matters we're gonna be commenting on.
I think the second part in terms of that,
your question about, um, what
questions have panels being asking of local authorities,
I can't answer that in detail.
I haven't been particularly tracking it.
But I think the thing to bear in mind is this
local authorities who are likely to respond, um, out of, uh,
or consistently with their functions, they don't,
they don't, uh, have a public interest function.
They may not have perfect knowledge
and you may be expecting them to perhaps comment on
business matters or matters of commerce
or matters which might in impact, uh,
property ownership rights
or other private individual rights that I think is,
is probably unrealistic
and outside their statutory function.
So that's the thing to be, be, um, aware of.
They may not, they may not be commenting
because it's not their function to comment
and they may not be adopting a public interest, um,
role or advocacy.
Thank you. Thank you. Look, we'll now move to Grant. Just
A very quick question and we
others have questions as well.
Um, you mentioned about the appointment of panelists
and, you know, and trying to find good
people to do this role.
What the changes have been proposed here.
Would that have any impact on the ability to A, find
and b appoint people who might be prepared to come and do
It already is? Yes.
So since uh, uh, this, uh, bill came to the house, uh,
it is already having that effect.
And so for one panel that I have been, uh, uh, uh, talking,
uh, to in, in terms of prospective panel members, uh,
one member has said, uh,
if a government policy statement comes in providing
direction, uh, within a sector on the economic, uh,
you know, the regional national benefits, he would likely
regard that as being, um, uh, coming across as independence
and, and would wonder why you would even need somebody
with his expertise on the panel if that was the direction.
So that was from one member
of the second member of the same panel. Uh, I've just
Had another panel chair of a thing that's completed.
Uh, I've asked, would you be prepared to do another one?
He said not of the 60 working days limit comes in.
I, I just can't see how, and,
And that was one of the main reasons. Yep.
60. And I've had the same comment,
but my other prospective chair on this panel
to say 60 days is inadequate.
Uh, and he could not without uh, reputational damage,
accept an appointment on that basis.
Yeah. Thank you. And,
and I could say that your likely decisions coming out
of it would not reflect the, um,
real direction given in this act about, um, what is
to be covered off, uh, in a decision.
And it just leaves you susceptible to review and appeal.
So thank you. Difficult. Thank you.
We'll go to Ryan Hamilton. Um,
Thanks, thanks for your submission.
Um, I'm just wondering, and
and perhaps you could submit it as a,
as another written submission to us
because I'm, I'm sort of putting you on the spot.
It is kind of riddled through your submission.
You're touching on it now, the 60 days versus,
you know, what we're proposing.
Are you able to submit like just a one pager that,
that says, you know, what all these different points
where it's 15 days to do a panel
or 10 working days, whatever it is, versus
what the acts is proposing versus
what your experience has been.
Just lay it out a little bit clearer for
Us. So you want us to lay
out, oh, sorry. So, okay.
Say that again. So you want me
to come back at it this looking
At what the, what the reality is for you in terms
of processing times and all these different areas Yeah.
Versus what we're proposing so we can have a bit of a sense.
'cause it's kind of hard to correlate it
through your submission.
Yeah. And and that's the, that's, that's the complexity
of this legislation.
That's the cobweb that Jennifer was talking about.
You pull on one strand, you will be affecting something else
Somewhere else. Yeah.
Um, and so there isn't, and
and really urging caution here, you,
you shouldn't approach this as if
I am enacting something under section 50, subsection one,
and then we're doing something over here in terms of section
53 I that and,
and I I'm not trying to belittle the complexed,
I'm just speaking for brevity.
Mm-hmm. But if you could kind
of lay out the gross numbers in terms
of your processing times versus what we're pro
what we're proposing and also
Yeah, we can
statistics. Is that what you want? Yeah. Just,
Just like a dashboard. Yeah.
And also to your point about, you know, 149 projects,
not a lot of 'em are, are lodged.
There's only, you know, as you lodge them, you form these,
but what are, what's the current lodgement pipeline
and just so we get a sense of timelines Yeah. Actual, yeah.
Yeah. I mean the EPA is probably better placed
to provide that information to you.
Okay. We, we don't move
until we get something handed over to us.
They do give us a bit of a heads up
to say this is gonna come
to you in the next couple of weeks.
So we do have a sense of what's in the pipeline,
but we also know there are dozens of other applications
that are subject of ongoing engagement
with Department of conservation, so
On. Okay. That's something we could take offline
with our clap to ask
That. That's right. Just, just
very quickly, um,
you do talk about local authorities along,
and I mean a lot of these projects have come through
to the fast track because they've already been
through a council process.
Would I be right in saying that? No.
Some, some of them have been through a partial process
Yeah. With, and then when the
Opportunity has come up,
they've jumped Yeah. And they've withdrawn their,
So that's what I mean, so that they haven't got through
that process because it's really just been so slow
and so they've now come through to the fast track
and they're wanting to obviously.
So I don't faster it's a lot.
We dunno, that's another statistic is that how many
that you are seeing are in that category? I can't see.
Sometimes it's not apparent on the application material.
It's not until you actually have a conference
with the participants Yeah.
That you start to appreciate that there's a history
that hasn't been otherwise evident on the face of the
Documents. Okay. Okay.
And another very quick one,
because we have talked about this 15 days
and you've given 28 days as your average out
of those 23 panels,
what would be your recommendation if you were making a
compromise in terms of what you thought was
reasonably practical?
We've said it's really difficult to set a hard boundary
because the applications vary so much.
I mean, I've got one at the moment,
which is 171 housing development in Hawke's Bay.
Pretty straightforward compared to the complexity
of a brand new mining operation, uh,
in a really sensitive area.
I mean that those two things are very different
and they take different amounts of time,
different considerations, um, different availability
of different types of experts and so on.
That's really our key point is that, uh, we'd like
to be entrusted with the job of doing this properly,
the way it needs to be done
and to be given the flexibility to do it.
We are very mindful of the Section 10 principles.
Um, just one quick question from Steve Abel, um, which is,
is really mostly what we'll have time for.
Okay. So I just wanna pick up on your concerns that
already you've expressed that potential panelists
who are conscientious, capable, and credible mm-hmm.
Are gonna turn down this
because it lacks the robustness that they would expect
to be part of in a, in a process.
So what is the risk, um,
that increasingly will only get people willing
to participate in it despite it being so rushed?
And how does that impact public confidence in the process
being legitimate and
therefore the social license
that any approved project will have?
Uh, well, yes, the, the, we are already, uh,
receiving responses
and, uh, as we've indicated both in terms
of panels being set up panels, uh,
that have completed the process.
And I'd add to that existing panels as well
who are very concerned about the absence
of transitional provisions
and the anxiety is, uh, is parliament gonna be, um,
introducing those and then how, how
does it impact on the process?
So you, you might think, uh, that we will be casting
around for, um, people who would be prepared
to be appointed under a 62 day timeframe.
And you might think that that is rubber stamping. Hmm.
I don't think you'll get to rubber stamping
because the act is so demanding in its direction
on what is required for a good decision,
what is required for the decision.
And none of this changes that.
The real risk is your decision makers simply will not have
time to be able to work their way through, uh,
the complexity of schedule five sections 81 and 85.
They won't be able to do their job, uh, in a way, uh,
which adequately demonstrates that they have considered
and decided, uh, based on evidence, uh, the matters
that were in contention, the matters
that really important were important to people.
That leaves you vulnerable for judicial review and appeal.
Right. That's what the issue is.
And then as you say, that goes to public confidence process.
Thank you. Ryan. If it's really quick,
So you just touched on
something, we're talking to Catherine.
The, the, the variation
and nuance in terms of complexity versus simple.
What if there was a solution that was traffic light,
the complexity of the project?
So it gave you more time if the project was more complex
rather than the sort of one size
And who sets the traffic light?
Yeah, well with feedback from you, I mean,
is that, is that a good,
That Just adds another step into a process
that in our view isn't necessary
And they've gotta be a regional national
Significance. Okay.
Look, thank you very much.
We having met time, the bells are ringing for the house.
Look, we really appreciate your submission
and the experience that we've been able
to give us here today
and may have some, some follow up given you are going
through the processes and have a real understanding.
So I really appreciate your time. Thank you very much.
And now we end.